20,000 Palestinians killed in Gaza by
Israel armed and backed by the US and
European allies more fighting nearby to
hasbalah in Lebanon and the houthis in
Yemen among the groups involved could
Israel's war trigger a wider conflict
this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm Dar
abuga Israel's war on Gaza has killed at
least 20,000 Palestinians and injured
tens of thousands more American and
European allies have called for the
protection of civilians while
simultaneously arming the military
bombardment of one of the most densely
populated areas in the world
as the death toll Rises so too does
Regional tension and anger among
Israel's opponents so what happens if
the Gaza Onslaught continues could it
spark a wider war in the region and do
the US and its allies have any leverage
over the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu or does he have their backing
regardless of what he does We'll be
asking those questions and more of our
guests shortly but first Carle takes a
look at the possible dangers if Israel's
war in Gaza widens into a regional
conflict oh my God as bombs rain down on
Gaza the reverberations of Israel's war
are being felt further a
field most recently at Sea with Yemen's
houthis targeting ships in the Red Sea
in an act of solidarity they say with
Palestinians under Israel's
Onslaught that's prompted the US to form
what it calls a multinational Naval task
force to patrol the vital shipping
route within the first weeks of its war
on Gaza Israeli officials say they were
preparing for a possible expansion on
multiple fronts Hamas called on Regional
Affiliates for support following its
October the 7th attacks which killed
more than 1,100 Israelis airports in
Syria were bombed by Israel it says to
twart potential Iranian mobilization
efforts
there and in neighboring Iraq the only
Arab country in the Middle East that's
passed legislation Banning normalization
with Israel armed groups many backed by
Iran pledged their support for Hamas
launching attacks on us bases and
threatening to go further if Israel
continued its War not just on Gaza but
also in southern
Lebanon crossb attacks and exchanges of
fire between Israeli forces and Iran
back Hezbollah Fighters have increased
in recent
months Iran has sought to distance
itself from accusations it's playing a
direct role in the hummus offensive
against Israel but it has warned of
regional ramifications if Israel
continues its military campaign in
Gaza members of the gulf cooperation
Council have presented more of a united
front as the months of War drag on
pushing for a ceasefire and humanitarian
Aid access through diplomatic
means Qatar and Egypt mediators with
channels to both Israel and Hamas
secured a captive change deal and brief
pause in the
fighting and despite normalizing
relations with Israel through years ago
the United Arab Emirates DFT the latest
un Security Council resolution on a
ceasefire Regional power Saudi Arabia
has reportedly put its normalization
talks with Israel on hold as a joined
calls for lasting truce in
Gaza calls that as of now have fallen on
deaf
ears as the sound sound of bombs
continue to resonate across Gaza KY Le
Al jazer for Inside
Story let's now bring in our guest
joining us from New York City is Omar
Rahman who's a fellow at the Middle East
Council on global Affairs he focuses on
Palestine Middle East geopolitics and
American foreign policy in the region
over in Washington DC we have M pelled
who's a human rights activist and author
his book The General son journey of an
Israeli in Palestine is based on his
experiences as the son of a former
military governor of the Gaza Strip and
joining us from Brussels is Elijah
magnier a military and political analyst
Who as a former war zone correspondent
has covered more than 35 years of
conflict in the Middle East and North
Africa thanks for your time uh gentlemen
good to have you with us on Inside Story
Omar Rahman the longer the war in Gaza
goes on How likely is it that it Sparks
a regional war and I know that this is a
broad question but we'll drill down into
the details throughout this
program sure it certainly it it makes
the risk ever present obviously as long
as it it's ongoing uh that risk uh stays
there stays active uh and anything can
kind of kick it off obviously we've seen
uh the northern fronts between Israel
and Lebanon uh you know active since
October 7th and that has the potential
to escalate uh at any point uh in recent
weeks months um the in in Yemen have
have engaged now first firing Rockets uh
and now um you know closing the Babin
Mund straight to shipping lanes and that
has a much broader uh global economic uh
ramifications and obviously now the US
uh has has um you know put together kind
of a coalition a naal coalition which
importantly actually uh is not doesn't
have any uh Arab states with the
exception of bahin which is almost a
consolation prize here uh but those
other Arab states even though it affects
their economies as well uh can you know
have not have not engaged uh in that
effort and that's kind of important and
telling so Omar if there is then a
regional war and like you say anything
could kick it off does this then by
default mean uh more of the US's
involvement because right now we
understand the US is somewhat involved
in what's going on but how how um deep
would the US's involvement be if there's
a wider
escalation yeah the US is a is a party
to this conflict uh in many ways uh
first of all in its total support for
Israel as it's as it's carried out this
military campaign uh that includes uh
you know arming the Israelis that
includes diplomatic cover for the
Israelis that includes intelligence
sharing with the Israelis uh so in all
those particular ways and then also as
as you as you mentioned uh you know the
US has dispatched carrier fleets to the
region so it's engaged militarily
somewhat obviously it's not heavily
engaged militarily but but it's but it's
involved uh and that's a double-edged
swort because um you know in one sense
it's it's meant deterrence in another
sense it's a provocation it also puts
military targets more military Targets
in the region for others uh to attack
and we've seen that uh take place and so
you know the US is is definitely engaged
um and you know there there's many ways
in in which this can affect the region
not only in terms of War but uh you know
if Israel's intentions is to ethnically
cleanse the Gaza Strip as it appears is
the case you know that has effects for
border states like Egypt for Jordan if
go let okay speaking of Israel's
intentions moo I'll come over to you do
you think that there is a uh sort of a
premeditated intention by Israel to
widen this war or or could it just
suddenly erupt out of recklessness where
do you think the Israeli position is on
this y that's a good question but I
think we need to broaden the lens I mean
we can't just look at this particular um
at the particular you know events that
began on October the 7th we have to look
at the 75 year history of of of
Palestine Israel has been engaged in the
genocide for 75 years the rest of the
world has been silent mostly uh the Arab
countries have been neutralized either
through destruction as we've seen in
Lebanon s in I'm sorry in Libya Syria
Iraq and so on or through
normalization and Israel is free to do
everything it wants it's not only
America and the West that is supporting
Israel Israel has over 40 diplomatic
missions in Africa and we don't see the
African States standing up for Palestine
or or or anyone else in the world we
don't see the bricks Alliance um with
maybe the exception of Brazil and South
Africa standing with the Palestinians so
Israel is really quite free to do
everything it wants and there's really
nobody in the region that can seriously
threaten Israel perhaps the only the
only things we're seeing is perhaps the
houis uh uh actions are the only ones
that are that are showing some
responsibility in trying to curb and
respond to the genocide that's been
going on so granted what's the events
that began in October 7th um in which of
course you know Palestinians were able
to to to come out of this this this
prison which is the Gaza the Gaza Strip
and and paralyze the state of Israel
this is a you know heightening of the
savagery that we've seen by Israel
perhaps it's worse than anything we've
seen in the past but it's not separate
from everything that's been going on
since the state of Israel was
established you're absolutely right I
mean the context of all of this MO is is
in the occupation but what I want to get
to uh today and for the purposes of this
discussion is where does Israel stand
when it comes to widening this conflict
taking it outside of
Gaza well is Israel has got more air
power than anybody else and so I don't
think Israel is is worried about that if
anybody if anybody tries to seriously
engage with Israel then they will be
wiped out just like we've seen in
Lebanon over the years we've seen you
know Israel is already bombing in Syria
and so I I don't think Israel is
concerned about that plus the entire
world is supporting it they're getting
all the weapons that they need so I
don't think Israel is worried at all
about this and I'll have to also say I
don't think there's a strategy behind
Israel's actions or a great deal of
thinking I think what we're seeing is is
is Revenge is just it's just destruction
and killing for the sake of Vengeance
because Israel was humiliated on October
the 7th so I don't think Israel is
worried about that as long as it's got
it's it's it's able to maintain its
military uh you know power it's military
superiority over everybody else and like
I said the Arab countries have been
neutralized so who is there to threaten
Israel
okay uh Elijah let's bring you in and
can you weigh in on this discussion and
and you know we've already mentioned uh
the the houthis in Yemen and the US now
announcing this uh Maritime Coalition do
you think that this could spark a
regional
War it is already enlarging because uh
the intervention of Hezbollah from the
second day of this conflict and the
support of the Iraqi resistance
attacking the American bases is sending
strong messages to Israel and finally
the intervention of Anar H in Yemen is
even sending more powerful message to
the Israelis and to their allies that
this war is no longer contained in the
borders of Gaza alone but it is
enlarging slowly but surely this is the
style of the axis of the resistance
never play all the cards and I think
Israel is extremely worried about it
otherwise would never call for such a
force in the Red Sea to come for help uh
the American the French and the British
would not line up in R sea uh stopping
and intercepting the missiles and the
drones launched by the houis it will not
continue supplying the Israelis with
tens of thousands of ammunition it
protects Israel at the United Nation by
refusing anyc fire it's offered 2,000
delta forces in Israel to support it
they have American drones all the
support that Israel is getting from day
one is because Israel is weak and it
doesn't manage on its own to confront
multiple front but not only that but
even Gaza after 75 days it has occupied
the third of Gaza but control zero
ground because today there were attacks
on T Aviv yesterday again every single
day there are attacks on the Israeli
occupation forces inside Gaza it means
Israel is quite worried about what's
happening and how this war is enlarging
slowly but surely Elijah can the uh
what's happening in in Yemen and the Red
Sea can does this
uh sort of change the positions of the
Israelis or the Americans could we see
retaliation against the houthis in Yemen
do you
think well the yemeni is said already if
the Americans and they are fully aware
of that retaliate then the whole of
Babel Mand will be shut down but it is
going to be only limited to Babel Mand
because that will be considered a war
zone and no commercial marican company
will dare to come close to the Red Sea
they will all be diverted to Africa and
then the hthis will launch their surface
to surface missiles doesn't mean they
are stronger than the Coalition but they
will not be defeated but that means then
the war will even enlarge even further
because the question is what's going to
happen to the straight of homos what's
going to happen to the
Mediterranean the hit will not be left
alone as Gaza is not left left alone
okay um speaking of not being left alone
ahar rman I mean when we talk about a
possible regionalization we're talking
and as you were mentioning earlier about
the involvement in the US that currently
exists and and and could potentially
deepen does that then mean uh by default
uh the the deeper involvement of Iran I
don't know I mean Iran is in a sense
playing it safe it's it's kind of
playing the strategy it has it has
conducted for many years which is used
using uh you know non-state actors
within the region uh to carry out
certain goals to put pressure in various
ways so the direct involvement Iran you
know I don't know is uncertain now if
this if this you know really regionalize
uh and there's fullscale war in certain
places then I I'm sure Iran will become
involved one way or the other I think uh
you know it's not just Iran taking
action uh but you know the United States
Israel taking action against Iran and
bringing it you know directly into the
conflict itself so I think that is
is an everpresent uh
possibility and you know we'll see how
that plays out uh M would Israel
actually be able to fight let's say two
fullblown conflicts one obviously the
war going on in Gaza and then one one uh
on the border with Lebanon if it gets to
that point even with the US's backing
yes I mean again Israel's got has got
air power and the air power is the key I
mean granted the ground forces are not
as effective uh certainly not not when
they they face the hisbah fight ERS in
Lebanon or the Palestinians in Gaza but
Israel got air power we've seen what
Israel has done in Lebanon in the past I
mean they caused massive you know
millions of refugees total Destruction
um and I don't really see who is who is
out there that can threaten Israel with
with an allout War H made it very clear
that this is you know this is a
Palestinian issue that it's not going to
be a larger a larger wider War I I don't
see how Iran can possibly get involved
which not they're not going to send
troops I mean you know what I mean I
don't I don't see I don't see how this
is going to happen I think Israel
understands this and again Israel has
been working very hard for decades to
neutralize all of its neighbors either
by destruction or normalization and
nobody's got the military force that
Israel has or again the hardware the
capability the the the capability to
cause destruction so yes there's a b you
know missiles coming from from here
missiles coming from there the H in in
in Yemen trying to to add to this but a
serious threat to Israel I don't I don't
I don't see where it's going to come
from and again Israel's got the ability
to bomb and Destroy entire cities you
know and and and again with the full
support of the United States the full
support of the rest of the world so I
don't think Israel is I don't think
Israel has a reason to worry about this
um the only way that Israel the only
thing that Israel does have to worry
about and I believe they are worried is
on the Diplomatic front is on the public
opinion front is the fact that more and
more people around the world are
standing up for you know to support the
Palestinians but in terms of in terms of
War Israel I don't I don't see how what
where the threat would come from and I'm
sure the Israelis can see that as well
and I'll say again about Iran you know I
don't see how Iran's not going to be
sending troops I mean logistically this
doesn't really work and again Israel's
strategy of neutralizing its neighbors
is working very
well uh in in in in in allowing it to do
what it's doing and at the same time not
be threatened by anyone Elijah um look I
mean Hassan Nas did say in one of his
speeches that events on the ground will
dictate uh the group's position and what
they do going forward um but for the
Israelis having the Americans stationed
off the coast of Lebanon right now off
the shores of Lebanon uh do you think
that they're sending a message to
hasbalah in Lebanon absolutely not
because the uh Israelis were sending
several messages to Lebanon and tobah
and hisbah has been
retaliating and the Americans are trying
with the French to uh create a dialogue
where they can persuade hisbah to leave
the borders but the problem is that the
Americans and the Israelis have a
limited knowledge about how hisbah is
deployed in south of Lebanon because
they are the same people who live in the
south of Lebanon who are part of the
south of Lebanon that are part of the
society who are defending that front and
attacking Israel now those who think I
don't think the Israeli officials are
that uh naive to think that having a
superow with the air force that is
enough this this is really something in
the elementary school it's showed in the
military knowledge but if we look at
Afghanistan the Americans have the
superpower Against The Afghani who has
not even one Jet and yet the Americans
did not defeat Afghanistan the same came
in Lebanon 1982 the Israeli invaded the
country and hisbah doesn't have Jets and
in the year 2000 it would Barack pull
out of Lebanon it was kicked out in 2006
the Israeli had a super power and they
had the superiority in Air Force and
they did manage to achieve in their
objective and without going very far in
history in
2023 in Gaza Israel has 700 Jets what
the Jets has achieved so far has any of
the Hamas member raised a white flag to
an Israeli jet this is why they had to
send boots on the ground and the solders
that are on the ground are attacked and
are killed and are suffering High
casualty in a tiny little area in a big
open concentration camp that was
surrounded for all these years and yet
managing to stand against what used to
be called the most uh powerful Army in
the Middle East that was humiliated on
the 7th of October and continue to be so
in Gaza every single day right um let's
move on to uh Ahad for a moment Ahad do
you think that the US has a clear plan
as to where this war is heading and I'm
not here asking you about the day after
what happens to Gaza I'm asking about
the actual war on the ground do you
think the US wants to see a temp
ceasefire a permanent ceasefire is is
there a strategy well it's made pretty
clear that it is uninterested in a
ceasefire from Its Behavior at the UN
Security Council in terms of vetoing and
delaying uh un Security Council
resolutions which would have a legal
legally binding uh uh effect um at the
same time you know obviously the US is
is making statements I don't know if
it's paying lip service to the civilian
casualties and the way that Israel is
conducting the war now it's hard to say
if that's genuine concern if it's
posturing while you know playing
interference running interference for
the Israelis whether this is some kind
of schizophrenic policy in terms of you
know Biden in in terms of allout support
for Israel While others in his
administration are wavering on that
front uh it's hard to say but you know
the US when where it matters where it
counts is arming the Israelis it's
financing the Israelis it's providing
support for the Israelis on the ground
uh as well as uh within the United
Nations that's important and it's it's
really hard to understand you know the
benefit for the United States I think in
every possible way this is a disaster
for the United States in terms of its
national interests in terms of its
International standing uh even
domestically I mean if you could make
the argument that domestically this was
helping Biden that would be one thing
but his support is at its lowest
possible uh and and and several polls
are showing that that is also even tied
to his uh his response to what's
happening in Gaza so on every front uh
this is this is a problem for the United
States and yet uh it is continuing to to
carry on along this path and support
Israel um and that is that is very
problematic M do you do you think that
the US and other allies who are still
supporting Israel have any leverage over
the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu at this point or or does he
have their backing regardless of what he
does and how he conducts this war well
the answer is yes to both I mean they he
does have their support right now of
course um because this is Israel and
Israel has always had the support of the
of its allies 110% again going back
historically the genocide of of of the
Palestinian people going back 75 years
you know nobody's ever stood in Israel's
way um they have leverage of course they
have leverage they could stop this
tomorrow they could dismantle they could
bring to the complete dismantling of the
the apartheid state tomorrow and then
the creation of a free Democratic
Palestine from The River To The Sea they
could have elim they could they could
have prevented all these tens of
thousands of horrific deaths of
Palestinians in Gaza over the last
couple of months so of course they have
leverage they do have leverage the
question the thing is they're not using
their leverage rather than using their
leverage and I agree this is
strategically this is this is a huge
blunder because why do you think that
they're not using their leverage at this
point because there's no reason to I
mean there's no the public opinion is
not pressuring the elected politicians
to do so there's a tradition in the
United States and in the west of
supporting Israel a tradition that goes
back a very long time and is the result
of a great deal of effort by the various
zionists that groups that that exist
that operate in the west so so
supporting Israel is something that
comes naturally it's not even something
people have to think about because it is
so so entrenched in in in the culture
and the thinking in the west that we
must support Israel and so there's no
real deep strategic thinking going into
this it's almost reflexive I think um
and so the there unless there's some
serious pressure by
constituents that will force elected
officials to stand up and and the
apartheid state and and this genocide
and end this massive brutality against
the Palestinian people there's no reason
to expect they will use their leverage
because again this is part of this is
how business is done there's nobody
disrupting the business as usual of
supporting Israel there's nobody
standing up there and presenting the
case for Palestine if you will it
doesn't exist there's no counterpart to
the Israeli efforts to the Israeli
lobbies to the various Israeli groups
that operate in you know all over all
over the United States and in in Europe
so until such time that such you know a
presence exists there's no reason to
expect the United States or the West
will use their leverage against Israel
um Elijah look it's been described as as
a genocide what's going on in Gaza by uh
UN Human Rights experts uh but still as
mik was just saying uh the US not using
its leverage on Israel to stop this war
are the Israelis actually achieving any
of their strategic military objectives
that they set out to do what they have
announced they will never achieve but
what they did not announce they are
trying to achieve it so they said we
will defeat Hamas and free all the
hostages and the prisoners and the
captives whatever so they understood
they cannot release anyone without
negotiation so that's objective is not
going to be achieved and they are asking
Qatar to mediate for the release of the
prisoners and to uh El Hamas a former
prime minister ahud Barat said Hamas is
an ideology cannot be defeated this is
why the Israelis are doing something
completely different that are destroying
Gaza so they are making sure that no in
no people no Palestinian Christian or
Muslim will ever return to the north at
least this is where they are at at the
moment and they have destroyed all that
part now this is where everybody is
looking at what's happening there and
the behavior of the resistance if it is
still on the same Pace because nobody
wants to disturb the Palestinian cause
and all the people who are supporting
Gaza and supporting the Palestinian
resistance to defend themselves are
making sure that the war is not turning
between Israel and Iran or Israel and
Hezbollah or Israel and in Iraqis this
is why there is a very strong Focus
what's happening in Gaza and how far the
Israelis are going to continue the
destruction and the killing of the
children and women but how delicate is
the situation Elijah so that you know
that turning point that could turn
between with the Iraqis or with hasbalah
in Lebanon or with the houthis in Yemen
how delicate is it at this
point it is extremely delicate because
the Palestinian cause should not be
diverted of course otherwise it will
lose the support of the population
worldwide so far who is supporting
Israel is only the United States and
Britain obain to vote in favor of non
ceasefire therefore the rest of the
world doesn't stand with Israel however
it is important not to create a a
conflict between Iran and Israel or
Hezbollah and Israel but in the name of
Gaza in the name of the children and
women in Gaza this is exactly what ansar
in Yemen have done and this is why they
limited their action only to lift The
Siege on Gaza so they not fighting in
the name of Iran they not fighting in
the name of whatever proxies anyone
would like to call them they fighting in
the name of the Palestinian civilians
who are murdered every single day in
Gaza by the Israelis all right we'll
have to leave it there thank you so much
for joining us thanks to my guest Omar
Rahman M pellet and Elijah mager thank
you for watching you can see the program
again anytime by visiting our website
al.com for further discussion you can go
to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory join the
conversation on X our handle is AJ
inside story from myself and the whole
team here in delha thanks for watching
and bye-bye for
now